'\" t
.ig

This file is part of enigma-suite-0.76.

Copyright (C) 2005 Stefan Krah

troff.1 was used as a template for this man page. troff.1 is part of groff,
the GNU roff type-setting system.

..
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.mso www.tmac
.
.if n \{\
.  mso tty-char.tmac
.  ftr CR R
.  ftr CI I
.  ftr CB B
.\}
.
.if '\*[.T]'dvi' \
.  ftr CB CW
.
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Title
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH ENIGMA 1 "2006" "enigma-suite-0.76"
.SH NAME
enigma  \-  a command line Enigma simulator and message breaking program
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.nr a \n(.j
.ad l
.nr i \n(.i
.in +\w'\fBenigma 'u
.ti \niu
.B enigma
.de OP
.ie \\n(.$-1 .RI "[\ \fB\\$1\fP" " \\$2" "\ ]"
.el .RB "[\ " "\\$1" "\ ]"
..
.OP \-hvicxaR
.OP \-M model
.OP \-u umkehrwalze
.OP \-w wheel-order
.OP \-r ring-settings
.OP \-s stecker-pairs
.OP \-m message-key
.OP \-o output-file
.OP \-n passes
.OP \-z maximum-score
.OP \-k single-key
.OP \-f lower-bound
.OP \-t upper-bound
.RI "[\ " trigram-dictionary\ bigram-dictionary\ ciphertext "\ ]"
.br
.ad \na
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.BR enigma
is a command line simulator for the models Heer, M3 and M4.
It also has the ability to break Enigma messages using ciphertext-only attacks.
The following options fall into five categories:
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH GENERAL OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP \w'\-wstecker-pairsx'u+2n
.BI \-M " model"
Set the machine type to
.IR model .
Valid settings are H, M3 or M4. Defaults to H (Heer).
This must be the first argument on the command line!
.TP
.B \-h
Display help screen.
.TP
.B \-v
Display version information.
.TP
.BI -o " output-file"
Output is written to
.IR output-file .
Defaults to stdout.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SIMULATOR OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP \w'\-wstecker-pairsx'u+2n
.BI \-u " ukw"
Set Umkehrwalze to
.IR ukw .
Select A (Heer only), B or C. Defaults to B.
.TP
.BI -w " wheel-order"
Set wheels to
.IR wheel-order .
Valid settings are 123 thru G876. Left letter [B,G] stands for wheels Beta
or Gamma (M4 only). Left digit stands for left wheel, middle digit stands for
middle wheel, right digit stands for right wheel. Digits must not be repeated.
Defaults to 123.
.TP
.BI -r " ring-settings"
Set rings to
.IR ring-settings .
Valid settings are AAA thru ZZZZ. Defaults to AAA.
.TP
.BI -s " stecker-pairs"
Set plugboard to 
.IR stecker-pairs .
Valid settings are 1 to 13 pairs of letters. No spaces in between. Letters
must not be repeated. Defaults to none.
.TP
.BI -m " message-key"
Set start position of wheels to
.IR message-key .
Valid settings are AAA thru ZZZZ. Defaults to AAA.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH  IC OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.BI -i
[COMMON OPTIONS]
.BI "" " trigram-dict bigram-dict ciphertext"
.RS
.P
Break an enigma message using ic statistics. This option requires three
command line arguments, the log-ngram dictionaries
.IR trigram-dict ,
.IR bigram-dict
and the message
.IR ciphertext .
If no range is specified
with the -f and/or -t options, the program runs in two stages:
              
First it iterates through all UKW, wheel and message settings. All
letters are left unsteckered, and the rings remain set to A. The
setting yielding the highest ic count in the decrypted candidate
plaintext is retained. Then all fast ring settings are tried, the
best one is retained, same for the  middle rings. Subsequently a
hill climb is used to determine the stecker settings.

In the second stage the  procedure is repeated, this time iterating
through all UKW, wheel, message AND ring settings.

If a range is specified, the program immediately starts at the second
stage.

The ic approach does not work well on shorter messages.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH  "HILL CLIMB OPTIONS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.BI -c
[COMMON AND HILL CLIMB OPTIONS]
.BI "" " trigram-dict bigram-dict ciphertext"
.RS
.P
Break an enigma message using hill climbing. This option requires three
command line arguments, the log-ngram dictionaries
.IR trigram-dict ,
.IR bigram-dict
and the message
.IR ciphertext .
If no range is specified, the program iterates through all UKW, 
wheel, fast ring and message settings, attempting a hill climb on 
each of the settings.
.RE
.TP
.BI -n " n"
Do
.IR n
passes. Defaults to 1.
.TP
.BI -z " n"
Terminate if score
.IR n
is reached. Useful for testing. Defaults to INT_MAX-1.
.TP
.BI -k " keystring"
Perform hill climb on a single arrangement specified by
.IR keystring .
Useful for testing.
.TP
.B \-R
Standalone option:  Resume a hill climb:  When the program receives
SIGTERM, SIGINT or SIGQUIT, the state of the hill climb is saved to
the file ``00hc.resume''. With this option the hill climb can be started
again from where it left off. Only the -o option can be given in combination
with -R.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH  "SEARCH SPACE OPTIONS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.B Default:
Only settings where the slow wheel moves before the first
letter is enciphered are tested within the given range.
.TP
.B \-x
All other settings which result in a slow wheel movement are
tested. This option complements the default run.
.TP
.B \-a
All settings where the slow wheel moves are tested.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH  "COMMON OPTIONS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP \w'\-woutput-filex'u+2n
.BI -f " keystring"
Search from (including)
.IR keystring .
.TP
.BI -t " keystring"
Search up to (including)
.IR keystring .
This keystring has to be greater or equal to the -f keystring.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH KEYSTRING
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The keystrings used to specify ranges with -f and -t have the following format:
.
.P
.TS
tab(@);
c c c c
l lB l l.
@@@
@@\fBLowest:@Highest\fP:@
@@@
@H :@A:123:AA:AAA@C:543:ZZ:ZZZ
@M3:@B:123:AA:AAA@C:876:MM:ZZZ
@@|  |  ||  |@
@@|  |  ||  `l, m, r message key@
@@|  |  ``middle, right ring@
@@|  `left, middle, right wheel@
@@`ukw@
@@@
@M4:@B:B123:AA:AAAA@C:G876:MM:ZZZZ
@@| | |  ||  ||@
@@| | |  ||  ``greek, l, m, r message key@
@@| | |  ``middle, right ring@
@@| | `left, middle, right wheel@
@@| `greek wheel@
@@`ukw@
.TE
.
.P
If the -f option is omitted, the lowest possible keystring is assumed.
If the -t option is omitted, the highest possible keystring is assumed.

The program increments the keystring in the way of an odometer,
starting at the right message key. Settings resulting in an illegal
wheel order are skipped.


.B M3, M4 specialty:

When the middle or right wheel is one of [6-8], only 13 ring settings
have to be checked, so rings [N-Z] are skipped. In these cases the
program only allows rings [A-M] as the bounds.

With the -k option all rings are allowed.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "RESUME FILE"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
The resume file ``00hc.resume'' captures the state of the hill climb at
interrupt time and stores the information in this order:
.P
\fBLine 1:\fP
.RS
.IR model , " keystring-from" , " keystring-to" , " keystring-current" ,
.IR " slow-wheel-mode", " n-passes", " firstpass", " max_score"
.RE
.P
\fBLine 2:\fP (best key found so far):
.RS
.IR model , " keystring-best-key" , " stecker-best-key" , " score-best-key"
.RE
.P
In the actual file the items are separated by '='.
.P
slow-wheel-mode can have the values 0 (default), 1 (-x option),
2 (-a option).
.P
firstpass can have the values 1 (yes) or 0 (no).
.P
n-passes and max_score can have the values 0-(INT_MAX-1).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SIMULATION EXAMPLES"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
To en/decipher a text using the default settings, simply enter:
.P
.RS  
enigma
.RE
.P
Type in the text (white-space allowed), then enter EOF (CTRL-D
on unix systems) to start en/decryption. If you have not entered
a newline after the last letter, you have to enter EOF twice.
.P
Some examples using various models and various settings:
.P
.RS
enigma -M H -u B -w 531 -r QIX -s MNBVCXZLKJHGFDSAPOIU -m ACE
.P
enigma -M M3 -u C -w 781 -r GHL -s QWERTYUIOPAS -m WSK
.P
enigma -M M4 -u B -w G273 -r RGSK -s LKJHGFDSAPOIUYTREWQM -m QKLC
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "MESSAGE BREAKING EXAMPLES"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
Attempt to break a message using ic statistics, both stages (see -i option):
.P
.RS
enigma -M H -i trigram_dict bigram_dict ciphertext
.RE
.P
Attempt to break a message using ic statistics, only check within the given
range.
.P
.RS
enigma -M H -i -f "A:231:AA:BBB" -t "A:231:AA:ZZZ" trigram_dict bigram_dict
ciphertext
.RE
.P
Attempt to break a message using hill climbing, only check scrambler
states that have an equivalent where the slow wheel does not move:
.P
.RS
enigma -M M3 -c -f "B:456:AA:FFF" -t "C:183:AA:BCF" trigram_dict bigram_dict
ciphertext
.RE
.P
Check scrambler states that can only be expressed in terms of the
slow wheel moving:
.P
.RS
enigma -M M3 -cx -f "B:456:BA:FFF" -t "C:183:BA:BCF" trigram_dict bigram_dict
ciphertext
.RE
.P
Attempt to break an M4 message, check all unique scrambler states,
300 passes, output to resultfile:
.P
.RS
enigma -M M4 -ca -n 300 -o resultfile trigram_dict bigram_dict ciphertext
.RE
.P
Test a single arrangement, 100 passes, abort if score is higher than 3500000:
.P
.RS
enigma -c -n 100 -z 3500000 -k "B:123:SK:JKL"  trigram_dict bigram_dict
ciphertext
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
enigma returns 0 on success, EXIT_FAILURE on failure, 111 if it
has stopped on SIGTERM, SIGINT or SIGQUIT during a hill climb.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.
.BR enigma-client(1) ,
.BR mkdict(1)
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
Stefan Krah <stefan@bytereef.org>
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
Please report bugs, suggestions to <enigma-suite@bytereef.org>
.
.P
